blog-post.md, before:

# Introducing changes to Kedro Datasets

> TL;DR: Datasets are moving into a separate package called `kedro-datasets`.

### Introduction
Datasets are Kedro's way of dealing with input and output in a data pipeline. They are Python classes that extend [`AbstractDataSet`](https://kedro.readthedocs.io/en/stable/kedro.io.AbstractDataSet.html#kedro.io.AbstractDataSet). [Kedro supports many datasets](https://kedro.readthedocs.io/en/stable/kedro.extras.datasets.html) out of the box to allow you to process data of different formats, such as Pandas, Plotly, and Spark.

Datasets are an important part of Kedro, but at the same time it is a component that does not fit with the rest of the framework from a software architecture perspective. Datasets are currently packaged under the "extras" directory, which already indicates it is extra functionality that can be used with the Kedro framework. Some of the reasons why datasets do not fit with the Kedro framework are:
- The Kedro framework has a different breaking change velocity from the datasets: the datasets are less stable and need to be updated more frequently
- The framework does not depend on a specific dataset implementation to function
- The built-in datasets are in no way different than any custom dataset implementation from architectural point of view

This is why we will be moving the datasets into a separate package, called `kedro-datasets`. Moving `kedro.extras.datasets` from the framework is a breaking change, therefore we will introduce this change in stages:
1. Make a separate `kedro-datasets` package and have `kedro` instantiate datasets from `kedro-datasets` with higher priority than `kedro.extras.datasets`
2. Remove `kedro.extras.datasets` from the core Kedro package when we ship Kedro `0.19.0`


### What is the change?
Datasets will be removed from the core Kedro package into a separate package called `kedro-datasets`. This means that in the future users will need to install both `kedro` and `kedro-datasets` to leverage all functionality.
Moreover, any dataset contributions need to be added to the new repository.

### Why are we doing this?
The main reason for moving datasets to its own repository is because the rest of Kedro framework has a different breaking change velocity from the datasets. In the past this caused the following issues:
- It was not possible to add support for Python 3.9 and 3.10 to Kedro framework until all dataset dependencies had released a version compatible with Python 3.9 and 3.10
- Adding support for newer versions of the datasets was held back by the need for more conservative versioning of the framework
- For users, this often meant maintaining workarounds to make old versions of Kedro work with other tools

Moving datasets into its own package means that Kedro becomes more modular, making it possible for users to upgrade only the `kedro-datasets` dependency in production rather 
than modifying the entire template. To be able to use the latest version of the full framework, users will have to migrate the template eventually, but being able to upgrade datasets much faster than they are able to do 
now will be an improvement for production maintenance and allows users to utilise newer datasets with older versions Kedro. It also opens up the possibility of using datasets without Kedro. 

### How will your new workflow look?
Once datasets are moved to the new repository and removed from the core Kedro package, users will need to change a couple of things to use the framework and datasets as before:
1. In addition to installing Kedro, users will need to install kedro-datasets to make use of datasets. Specifically, you will need to run `pip install kedro-datasets[SomeDataSet]` instead of `pip install kedro[SomeDataSet]` to install a dataset
2. Use `import kedro_datasets` instead of `import kedro.extras.datasets` to import datasets into code
3. Make any dataset updates and contributions to the new `kedro-datasets` repository instead of the core `kedro` one

### Find out more!
You can follow any `kedro-datasets` developments and more on [our Github repository](https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/). 

We are very excited about the release of this structure in Kedro 0.19.0. We believe that it will enhance the experience of using Kedro and allow you to keep your packages up to date more easily.

If you have any question or feedback, please do let us know by [raising a Github issue](https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/issues/new/choose).

Commit message:

Structural changes to blog post
Changes made: 

 - I cut a ton of content that felt repeated
 - Tried to highlight that this is for a stable release of Kedro
 - Reshuffled the "Why?" content
 - Tried to remove a lot of the software-engineering jargon

blog-post.md, after:

# Introducing changes to Kedro Datasets

> TL;DR: Datasets are moving into a separate package called `kedro-datasets`. We believe this change will steer us closer to releasing a stable Kedro 1.0.

### Introduction

Datasets are Kedro's way of dealing with input and output in a data and machine-learning pipeline. [Kedro supports many datasets](https://kedro.readthedocs.io/en/stable/kedro.extras.datasets.html) out of the box to allow you to process different data formats including Pandas, Plotly, Spark and many more.

We're proposing an architectural change that will move Datasets from the "extras" directory in Kedro into a separate package, called `kedro-datasets`. This change is one of the initiatives that will bring us closer to a stable release of Kedro 1.0. 

### Why are we doing this?

We are focused on reducing existing sources of breaking changes in Kedro so that we can achieve a stable framework. A primary reason why we're proposing moving datasets into a separate package is to reduce breaking changes associated with dataset dependencies. 

In the past, we have faced challenges like not being able to: 
 - [Add Python 3.9 and 3.10 support](https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/issues?q=is%3Aissue+python+3.9+is%3Aclosed) to the Kedro framework until all of our datasets' had released Python 3.9 and 3.10 support. 
 - Provide new, but workflow-breaking, dataset functionality to our users because the Kedro framework has more conservative versioning i.e. on average we ship a breaking release once a year and users would have to wait that long for changes to the datasets.

Moving datasets into a separate package means that: 
 - Kedro becomes more modular, making it possible for users to upgrade only the `kedro-datasets` dependency in production rather than modifying the entire template.
- Users can leverage newer datasets with older versions of Kedro and can use datasets without Kedro. 

### What is your new workflow?

Once datasets are moved to the new repository and removed from the core Kedro package, users will need to change a couple of things to use the framework and datasets as before:
1. In addition to installing Kedro, users will need to install `kedro-datasets` to make use of datasets. Specifically, you will need to run `pip install kedro-datasets[SomeDataSet]` instead of `pip install kedro[SomeDataSet]` to install a dataset.
2. Use `import kedro_datasets` instead of `import kedro.extras.datasets` to import datasets into code.
3. Make any dataset updates and contributions to the new `kedro-datasets` repository instead of the core `kedro` one.

### How will we make this change happen? 

Moving `kedro.extras.datasets` from the framework into a separate package is a breaking change, therefore we will introduce this change in stages by:

1. Making a separate `kedro-datasets` package and having `kedro` instantiate datasets from `kedro-datasets` with higher priority than `kedro.extras.datasets`.
2. Removing `kedro.extras.datasets` from the core Kedro package when we ship Kedro 0.19.0.

### Find out more!
You can follow any `kedro-datasets` developments and more on [our GitHub repository](https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/issues/1457). 

We are very excited about the release of this structure in Kedro 0.19.0. We believe that it will enhance the experience of using Kedro and allow you to keep your packages up to date more easily.

If you have any questions or feedback, comment on our [existing GitHub issue about this work](https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/issues/1457) or by [raising a GitHub issue](https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/issues/new/choose).
